# TPS Testing

For running all the tests,
 enter this directory and type:
```
./run test-all.sh
```

Invoking the script `test-all.sh` in each directory
 (with the `run` command)
 runs all the tests in that directory and its subdirectories.

A large portion of tests are generated by capturing the behavior of the code
 (when it seems to work correctly) with the purpose of regression tests.
These are called "captured" tests.
In order to regenerate those tests,
 run:
```
./run capture-all.sh
```

Running the script `capture-all.sh` in a directory,
 (re)generates all the captured tests in that directory and its subdirectories.

You can use `run.bat` instead of `./run` in windows (with `msys`).
Though, the tool runs slower in windows.

By default, some details about the process of running/capturing the tests is printed.
Adding the option `-q` or `--quiet` after `run` prevents writing these information.
Examples:
```
./run -q test-all.sh
./run --quiet capture-all.sh
```



## Important testing commands and concepts

### The sandbox directory

Path: `sandbox`

All the temporary files created throughout the test executions
 are stored in _the sandbox directory_.
This directory is ignored by `git`.

Note:
Due to the current design and implementation of the testing infrastructure,
 you cannot run two `test_all.sh` (or `capture_all.sh`) scripts concurrently,
 as they all use the same sandbox directory.


### The stage directory

Path: `sandbox/stage`

The commands being tested are (usually) run inside _the stage directory_.
The stage directory is needed to be initialized
 before executing the command under test.

A path is considered
 _relative to the stage directory_
 only if it does not start with "`/`".


### Command `stage_dir`

```
stage_dir &lt;a-given-dir&gt;
```

Initializes the stage directory by
 (deleting its current files and then)
 copying directory `<a-given-dir>`.


### Command `stage_an_empty_dir`

```
stage_an_empty_dir
```

Initializes the stage directory by
 (deleting its current files and then)
 creating an empty directory.


### Command `run_in_stage`

```
run_in_stage &lt;command&gt; [command arguments...]
```

Executes the given command line in the stage directory.


### Command `expect_exec`

A major tool in the tests is the command `expect_exec`,
 which runs a command and verifies its expected behavior.
The command is (usually) executed in the stage directory.
```
expect_exec &lt;options...&gt; &lt;command&gt; [command arguments...]
```

Options:

* `-d <a-dir>`

  Sets the current working directory of the command (relative to the stage directory).
  If not specified, it checks the environment variable `EXEC_WORKING_DIRECTORY`
  (which can be set/unset respectively with `set_exec_cwd` and `unset_exec_cwd`).
  If the environment variable is not specified either,
  then the command is run in the root of the stage directory.


* `-abs`

  Makes the command path absolute.
  Default:
  `true` for and only for commands ending with `.sh` and `.py`.
  Files ending with `.sh` are automatically run by `bash`.
  Files ending with `.py` are automatically run by `${PYTHON}`, `python3`, or `python`.


* `-r <an-integer>`

  `-rnz`

  `-rignore`

  These flags specify the expected exit code of the command execution.
  Flag `-r` specifies the exact value of the expected exit code.
  Flag `-rnz` specifies that
  the exit code is expected to be a nonzero value,
  but its exact value is not important.
  Flag `-rignore` specifies that
  the exit code is not important at all
  and should be totally ignored.
  If none of these flags are specified,
  a zero exit code is expected.


* `-oignore`

  `-oempty`

  `-o <a-file-path>`

  `-oh <a-text-parameter>`

  `-oH <a-text-parameter>`

  `-oh2 <line-1> <line-2>`

  `-oH2 <line-1> <line-2>`

  `-oh<an-integer-k> <line-1> <line-2> ... <line-k>`

  `-oH<an-integer-k> <line-1> <line-2> ... <line-k>`

  These flags specify the expected standard output of the command execution.
  It is mandatory to use exactly one of them.

  Flag `-oignore`
  specifies that the output
  is not important at all
  and should be ignored.

  Flag `-oempty`
  specifies that the output
  is expected to be
  empty.

  Flag `-o`
  specifies that the output
  is expected to be
  exactly the same as the contents of the given file `<a-file-path>`.

  Flags `-oh` and `-oH`
  specify that the output
  is expected to be
  the same as the given parameter `<a-text-parameter>`.
  If `-oH` is used,
  the output
  must be _exactly_ the same as the given parameter.
  On the other hand,
  if `-oh` is used,
  the output
  must have an extra new-line character
  after `<a-text-parameter>`.

  Flags `-oh2` and `-oH2`
  work respectively similar to `-oh` and`-oH`,
  with the difference that the output
  is expected to have the two specified lines.
  The last line of output
  is expected to end with the new-line character
  if `-oh` is used.

  Flags `-oh<an-integer-k> ` and `-oH<an-integer-k>`
  are respectively the generalizations of `-oh2` and `-oH2`,
  expecting the output to have the $k$ specified lines.

  So,
  `-oempty`
  is equivalent to
  `-oH ""`,
  and
  `-oh "xyz"`
  is equivalent to
  `-oH2 "xyz" ""`.

* `-eignore`

  `-eempty`

  `-e <a-file-path>`

  `-eh <a-text-parameter>`

  `-eH <a-text-parameter>`

  `-eh<an-integer-k> <line-1> <line-2> ... <line-k>`

  `-eH<an-integer-k> <line-1> <line-2> ... <line-k>`

  These flags specify the expected standard error of the command execution.
  It is mandatory to use exactly one of them.
  Their definitions are quite similar to the `-o...` flags.


* `-iempty`

  `-i <a-file-path>`

  `-ih <a-text-parameter>`

  `-iH <a-text-parameter>`

  `-ih<an-integer-k> <line-1> <line-2> ... <line-k>`

  `-iH<an-integer-k> <line-1> <line-2> ... <line-k>`

  These flags specify the standard input
  provided for the command execution.

  If none of these flags is given
  or flag `-iempty` is used,
  the standard input will be redirected from `/dev/null`.

  Flag `-i` redirects the standard input from the given file `<a-file-path>`.

  Flag `-iH` sets the given string value `<a-text-parameter>` as the exact contents of the input.
  On the other hand,
  with flag `-ih`,
  the contents of the input is set to
  the given parameter `<a-text-parameter>` plus an extra new-line character.

  Flags `-ih...` and `-iH...`
  are generalizations of `-ih` and `-iH`,
  similar to the corresponding `-o...` flags.


* `-fu <probed-file-path>`

  `-fempty <probed-file-path>`

  `-fempty-dir <probed-file-path>`

  `-f <probed-file-path> <path-to-a-given-file-or-directory>`

  `-fh <probed-file-path> <a-text-parameter>`

  `-fH <probed-file-path> <a-text-parameter>`

  `-fh<an-integer-k> <probed-file-path> <line-1> <line-2> ... <line-k>`

  `-fH<an-integer-k> <probed-file-path> <line-1> <line-2> ... <line-k>`

  These flags specify the expected state of the file or directory `<probed-file-path>`
  after the execution of the command.
  The path `<probed-file-path>` is considered relative to the stage directory.
  These flags can be used more than once (for probing different files or directories).

  Flag `-fu`
  specifies that
  no file or directory
  is expected to be in `<probed-file-path>`.

  Flag `-fempty`
  specifies that
  an empty file
  is expected to be in `<probed-file-path>`.

  Flag `-fempty-dir`
  specifies that
  an empty directory
  is expected to be in `<probed-file-path>`.

  Flag `-f`
  specifies that
  the file or directory `<probed-file-path>`
  is expected to have exactly the same structure as `<path-to-a-given-file-or-directory>`
  (compared with `diff -rq`).

  Flags `-fh...` and `-fH...`
  specify the expected state of file `<probed-file-path>`
  similar to the corresponding `-o...` flags.


* `-vu <probed-var-name>`

  `-vs <probed-var-name> <a-string>`

  `-va <probed-var-name> <an-integer-k> <item-1> <item-2> ... <item-k>`

  `-vf <probed-var-name> <a-given-var-dump-file>`

  These flags specify the expected state of the variable `<probed-var-name>`
  after the execution of the command.
  These flags can be used more than once (for probing different variables).

  Flag `-vu`
  specifies that
  the variable `<probed-var-name>`
  is expected to be undefined.

  Flag `-vs`
  specifies that
  the variable `<probed-var-name>`
  is expected to be defined as
  a string variable
  with value `<a-string>`.

  Flag `-va`
  specifies that
  the variable `<probed-var-name>`
  is expected to be defined as
  an array of length `<an-integer-k>`
  with elements `<item-1>`, `<item-2>`, ..., `<item-k>`.

  Flag `-vf`
  specifies that
  the variable `<probed-var-name>`
  is expected to have
  exactly the same type and value as
  the variable "`variable_value`"
  defined (dumped) in file `<a-given-var-dump-file>`.



## Capturing commands

### Command `capture_exec`

The major tool in capturing the tests is the command `capture_exec`,
 which runs a command, captures its behavior, and generates an `expect_exec` command.
The command is (usually) executed in the stage directory.
```
capture_exec &lt;captured-test-key&gt; [options...] &lt;command&gt; [command arguments...]
```

The parameter `<captured-test-key>` is a unique string specifying the captured test.
The options are similar to `expect_exec`.
The expectation options of the generated `expect_exec` command are specified by `capture_exec`
 unless explicitly specified as an option for `capture_exec`.
Additionally, the following options are available for `capture_exec`:

* `-fc <probed-file-path>`

  Captures the state of the file or directory `<probed-file-path>`
  after the execution of the captured command
  and adds the corresponding `-f...` options in the generated `expect_exec` command line.


* `-vc <probed-var-name>`

  Captures the state of the variable `<probed-var-name>`
  after the execution of the captured command
  and adds the corresponding `-v...` options in the generated `expect_exec` command line.


### Command `capture_run`

A useful tool in capturing scripts is the command `capture_run`,
 which runs a command, and also generates the same command as a command to be run in the captured tests.
```
capture_run &lt;command&gt; [command arguments...]
```


### Command `capture_run_in_stage`

```
capture_run_in_stage &lt;command&gt; [command arguments...]
```

Works similar to `capture_run`,
 but executes the given command line in the stage directory.



## Implementation notes

The prefix `_TT_` in names of variables and functions stands for `TPS TESTING`.
This prefix is added to prevent name clashes between the test codes and main codes.
